>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW,
VENEZUELA HOLDS AN ELECTION FOR
A NEW NATIONAL ASSEMBLY THAT
COULD REWRITE ITS CONSTITUTION.
PARTIES THAT OPPOSE BELEAGUERED
PRESIDENT NICOLAS MADURO ARE
BOYCOTTING THE VOTE, BECAUSE
THEY SAY IT'S A SCHEME BY MADURO
TO EXPAND HIS EXECUTIVE POWERS.
MADURO'S SOCIALIST PARTY HAS
PRESIDED OVER A SEVERE ECONOMIC
DOWNTURN MARKED BY TRIPLE-DIGIT
INFLATION AND SCARCE SUPPLIES OF
FOOD AND MEDICINE.
THIS, AS VENEZUELA'S MOST
IMPORTANT EXPORT, OIL
PRODUCTION, CONTINUES TO
DECLINE.
FOR MORE ON THE CONTROVERSIAL
VOTE, I AM JOINED VIA SKYPE BY
REUTERS REPORTER BRIAN ELLSWORTH
FROM THE VENEZUELAN CAPITAL OF
CARACAS.
BRIAN, WE ARE ALMOST TALKING
ABOUT THE VOTE AS A MATTER OF
COURSE, HERE, TOMORROW.
WE KNOW THE OUTCOME, BECAUSE THE
OPPOSITION'S NOT PUTTING UP ANY
CANDIDATES.
>> YES, THAT'S RIGHT.
IN EFFECT, THE VOTE WILL TAKE
PLACE TOMORROW, AND THE
OPPOSITION PARTIES ARE NOT
PARTICIPATING, WHICH MEANS THAT
THIS 545-SEAT ASSEMBLY WILL GO
ENTIRELY TO ALLIES OF THE
SOCIALIST PARTY.
WE'RE LIKELY TO SEE NEXT WEEK AT
SOME POINT, THERE WILL LIKELY BE
SOME DIVISIONS THAT WILL EMERGE,
DIFFERENT GROUPS SORT OF SEEKING
TO CONTROL LEADERSHIP OF THE
INSTITUTION.
BUT AS YOU SAY, YES, THERE IS NO
OPPOSITION PARTICIPATION, SO
THERE ISN'T A LOT OF SUSPENSE AS
TO WHO WILL WIN.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, FOR PEOPLE
WHO DON'T FOLLOW THE INTERNAL
POLITICS OF VENEZUELA, WHAT DOES
THIS-- WHAT'S THE POWER THAT
THIS NATIONAL ASSEMBLY WILL
ACTUALLY HAVE?
>> WELL, THE CONSTITUTION HAS
ONE ARTICLE THAT GIVES VERY
VAGUE DESCRIPTION OF WHAT THIS
BODY DOES.
AND IT SAYS ALMOST NOTHING,
OTHER THAN THE FACT THAT IT CAN
REWRITE THE CONSTITUTION, AND IT
CANNOT BE CHALLENGED OR
OVERRULED BY ANY OTHER
GOVERNMENT AGENCY.
WHICH MEANS THAT NEITHER THE
COURTS, NOR ANY EXECUTIVE BRANCH
POWERS, OR ANYONE ELSE, CAN TELL
THIS ASSEMBLY NOT TO DO
SOMETHING.
LAST TIME THIS WAS DONE IN
1999, THERE WAS A VERY CLEAR
MANDATE TO REWRITE THE
CONSTITUTION.
NOW, THE CONSTITUTION ALREADY
GIVES QUITE A BIT OF GENEROUS
EXECUTIVE POWER TO THE
PRESIDENT, BUT THEY COULD, FOR
EXAMPLE, DISSOLVE THE
OPPOSITION-RUN CONGRESS.
THEY COULD FIRE THE PROSECUTOR,
THE CHIEF PROSECUTOR, WHO HAS
BEEN INCREASINGLY CRITICAL OF
THE MADURO GOVERNMENT.
SO, IT EFFECTIVELY CREATES A
SUPERBODY, THAT WILL HAVE
UNLIMITED POWERS, WITH VERY
UNCLEAR CONSEQUENCES AS TO WHAT
THAT WOULD MEAN.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THIS COULD
ACTUALLY KEEP MADURO IN POWER
INDEFINITELY, KIND OF SLIDING
AWAY FROM DEMOCRACY INTO A
DICTATORSHIP.
>> WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY WOULD
ACTUALLY DO.
BUT THE CURRENT ELECTORAL
SCHEDULE HAS MADURO'S TERM
ENDING IN EARLY 2019, AND THE
NEXT ELECTIONS TAKING PLACE IN
LATE 2018.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THEY
COULD DO IS, NOT ONLY ALTER THE
TIME FRAME FOR WHEN THE
ELECTIONS WOULD HAPPEN, BUT THEY
COULD ALSO ALTER THE WAY THE
ACTUAL VOTES ARE TAKING PLACE.
WHICH, IF YOU NOTE, IN THIS
ELECTION, THIS IS BEING--
THESE SEATS ARE BEING
DISTRIBUTED BY MUNICIPALITY,
WHICH BASICALLY OVER-REPRESENTS
THE RURAL AREAS, AND IN EFFECT,
OVER-REPRESENTS THE GOVERNMENT.
WHICH WAS THE MAIN OPPOSITION
ARGUMENT FOR SAYING, "WE'RE NOT
GOING TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS."
SO THEY COULD DO SIMILAR THINGS,
IN ORDER TO JUGGLE THE BASIC
ELECTORAL FUNCTIONING, IN AN
ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE
SOCIALIST PARTY BASICALLY CANNOT
WIN AN ELECTION, DUE TO THE
EXTREME ECONOMIC CRISIS.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, HOW DO THE
COUNTRIES IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD--
HOW DOES THE UNITED STATES WEIGH
IN ON THIS?
>> THE UNITED STATES HAS ALREADY
SANCTIONED-- LAST WEEK ANNOUNCED
SANCTIONS AGAINST 13 HIGH-
RANKING SOCIALIST PARTY
OFFICIALS.
AND THEY HAVE SAID MORE SWIFT
SANCTIONS ARE ON THE WAY, IF
THIS VOTE GOES THROUGH.
IT'S NOT IMMEDIATELY EVIDENT
WHAT THOSE SANCTIONS WOULD BE,
BUT IT COULD INVOLVE BLOCKING
THE SALE OF VENEZUELAN OIL TO
THE UNITED STATES, OR FINANCIAL
SANCTIONS THAT WOULD PREVENT
VENEZUELA FROM COLLECTING ON THE
OIL THAT IT SELLS.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN AFTER THIS
VOTE TOMORROW, IS THE CONDITION
OF LIFE LIKELY TO GET ANY BETTER
FOR THE PEOPLE OF VENEZUELA THAT
HAVE BEEN SUFFERING OVER THE
PAST TWO MONTHS, THAT WE'VE BEEN
CHRONICLING?
>> THIS IS ANOTHER OF THE
OPPOSITION'S ARGUMENTS AGAINST
THE ASSEMBLY, IS THAT THE
PRIMARY CONCERN OF ANY
VENEZUELAN THAT YOU SPEAK TO ON
THE STREET TODAY IS THAT THERE
ISN'T FOOD, THERE ISN'T
MEDICINE, AND PRICES ARE
SKYROCKETING.
THE ASSEMBLY, AS PROPOSED, MAKES
NO EVIDENT-- DOES NOTHING, IN
EFFECT, TO CHANGE ANY OF THAT.
THE REFORMS THAT THEY NEED TO
DO, WHICH WILL BE PAINFUL TO
CHANGE THIS, FROM A SORT OF
SOCIALIST, STATE-CONTROLLED
ECONOMY INTO A MARKET ECONOMY,
THEY HAVE REPEATEDLY AVOIDED
DOING.
AND THERE IS NO SUGGESTION THAT
THE ASSEMBLY IS READY TO DO
THIS, AND THERE IS NOTHING,
PER SE, ABOUT THE ASSEMBLY THAT
WOULD CHANGE THIS SITUATION.
IT'S NOT LIKE MONDAY, OR
WEDNESDAY, WE'RE SUDDENLY GOING
TO SEE FOOD ON THE SHELVES.
SO, THIS HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
PRIMARY ARGUMENTS AGAINST IT,
AND AS THINGS STAND, IT'S NOT
CLEAR THAT IT IS GOING TO CHANGE
ANY OF THOSE THINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
REUTERS REPORTER BRIAN ELLSWORTH
JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
CARACAS TODAY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.